README.md, before:

# TOKO RIZQI - Point of Sale (POS) System

A modern, full-featured Point of Sale (POS) application built with Laravel 12 and Livewire. This system helps businesses manage products, sales transactions, and inventory with ease. Features a clean, responsive interface with role-based access control for administrators and employees.

![Laravel](https://img.shields.io/badge/Laravel-12.x-FF2D20?style=for-the-badge&logo=laravel&logoColor=white)
![Livewire](https://img.shields.io/badge/Livewire-3.x-4E56A6?style=for-the-badge&logo=livewire&logoColor=white)
![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHP-8.2+-777BB4?style=for-the-badge&logo=php&logoColor=white)
![Tailwind CSS](https://img.shields.io/badge/Tailwind_CSS-4.x-38B2AC?style=for-the-badge&logo=tailwind-css&logoColor=white)

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Features](#-features)
- [Technology Stack](#-technology-stack)
- [Requirements](#-requirements)
- [Installation](#-installation)
- [Configuration](#-configuration)
- [Usage](#-usage)
- [Project Structure](#-project-structure)
- [Testing](#-testing)
- [Screenshots](#-screenshots)
- [Contributing](#-contributing)
- [License](#-license)

## ✨ Features

### 🔐 Authentication & Authorization
- Secure user authentication system
- Role-based access control (RBAC) with Spatie Permissions
- Two user roles: **Admin** and **Karyawan** (Employee)
- User management for administrators

### 📦 Product Management
- Add, edit, and delete products
- Product categorization
- Price management
- Product inventory tracking

### 💰 Sales Management
- Point of Sale (POS) interface for employees
- Sales transaction recording
- Automatic total calculation
- Sales history and reporting for administrators
- Detailed sales reports with product breakdown

### 📊 Dashboard & Analytics
- Separate dashboards for Admin and Employees
- Sales overview and statistics
- Recent transactions display
- Visual data representation

### ⚙️ Settings & Profile
- User profile management
- Password change functionality
- Appearance settings (theme customization)

### 🎨 Modern UI/UX
- Built with Livewire Flux components
- Responsive design (mobile-friendly)
- Dark mode support
- Modern, intuitive interface

## 🛠 Technology Stack

### Backend
- **PHP 8.2+** - Programming language
- **Laravel 12.x** - PHP framework
- **Livewire 3.x** - Full-stack framework for Laravel
- **Livewire Flux** - UI component library
- **Livewire Volt** - Single-file components
- **Spatie Laravel Permission** - Role and permission management

### Frontend
- **Tailwind CSS 4.x** - Utility-first CSS framework
- **Vite** - Next-generation frontend tooling
- **JavaScript (ES6+)** - Modern JavaScript

### Database
- **SQLite** - Lightweight database (default, easily configurable for MySQL/PostgreSQL)

### Development Tools
- **Pest** - Testing framework
- **Laravel Pint** - Code style fixer
- **Laravel Sail** - Docker development environment

## 📦 Requirements

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **PHP** >= 8.2
- **Composer** >= 2.0
- **Node.js** >= 18.x and **NPM**
- **SQLite** (or MySQL/PostgreSQL if preferred)
- **Web Server** (Apache/Nginx) or use `php artisan serve`

## 🚀 Installation

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd bljr
```

### Step 2: Install PHP Dependencies

```bash
composer install
```

### Step 3: Install Node Dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### Step 4: Environment Configuration

Copy the environment file and generate application key:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
php artisan key:generate
```

### Step 5: Database Setup

If using SQLite (default), create the database file:

```bash
touch database/database.sqlite
```

Or configure your preferred database in `.env`:

```env
DB_CONNECTION=mysql
DB_HOST=127.0.0.1
DB_PORT=3306
DB_DATABASE=your_database_name
DB_USERNAME=your_username
DB_PASSWORD=your_password
```

### Step 6: Run Migrations

```bash
php artisan migrate
```

### Step 7: Seed Permissions (for RBAC)

```bash
php artisan db:seed --class=PermissionSeeder
```

Or if you have a custom seeder:

```bash
php artisan db:seed
```

### Step 8: Build Assets

For development:

```bash
npm run dev
```

For production:

```bash
npm run build
```

### Step 9: Start the Development Server

```bash
php artisan serve
```

Or use the convenient dev script (runs server, queue, and vite concurrently):

```bash
composer dev
```

Visit `http://localhost:8000` in your browser.

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Environment Variables

Key environment variables to configure in `.env`:

```env
APP_NAME="TOKO RIZQI"
APP_ENV=local
APP_KEY=base64:... # Generated by key:generate
APP_DEBUG=true
APP_URL=http://localhost

DB_CONNECTION=sqlite
DB_DATABASE=/absolute/path/to/database/database.sqlite

# Or for MySQL
# DB_CONNECTION=mysql
# DB_HOST=127.0.0.1
# DB_PORT=3306
# DB_DATABASE=toko_rizqi
# DB_USERNAME=root
# DB_PASSWORD=

MAIL_MAILER=smtp
MAIL_HOST=mailpit
MAIL_PORT=1025
MAIL_USERNAME=null
MAIL_PASSWORD=null
MAIL_ENCRYPTION=null
MAIL_FROM_ADDRESS="hello@example.com"
MAIL_FROM_NAME="${APP_NAME}"
```

### Creating Roles and Users

After running migrations, create an admin user:

```bash
php artisan tinker
```

```php
$admin = \App\Models\User::create([
    'name' => 'Admin',
    'email' => 'admin@toko.com',
    'password' => bcrypt('password'),
    'email_verified_at' => now(),
]);

$admin->assignRole('admin');
```

Create an employee user:

```php
$karyawan = \App\Models\User::create([
    'name' => 'Karyawan',
    'email' => 'karyawan@toko.com',
    'password' => bcrypt('password'),
    'email_verified_at' => now(),
]);

$karyawan->assignRole('karyawan');
```

## 📖 Usage

### Admin Dashboard

Access the admin dashboard at `/admin/dashboard` (requires admin role):

- **Product Management** (`/admin/manajemenbarang`) - Manage products, categories, and prices
- **Sales History** (`/admin/riwayatpenjualan`) - View all sales transactions and reports
- **User Management** (`/admin/usermanagement`) - Manage users and assign roles

### Employee (Karyawan) Dashboard

Access the employee interface at `/karyawan/penjualan` (requires karyawan role):

- Input sales transactions
- Select products and quantities
- Complete sales with automatic total calculation

### User Settings

All authenticated users can access:

- **Profile Settings** (`/settings/profile`) - Update personal information
- **Password Settings** (`/settings/password`) - Change password
- **Appearance Settings** (`/settings/appearance`) - Customize theme preferences

## 📁 Project Structure

```
bljr/
├── app/
│   ├── Http/
│   │   └── Controllers/        # HTTP Controllers
│   ├── Livewire/               # Livewire Components
│   │   ├── Admin/              # Admin-specific components
│   │   ├── Auth/               # Authentication components
│   │   ├── Karyawan/           # Employee-specific components
│   │   └── Settings/           # Settings components
│   └── Models/                 # Eloquent Models
│       ├── ManjemenBarang.php  # Product model
│       ├── Penjualan.php       # Sales model
│       ├── PenjualanProduk.php # Sales product pivot model
│       └── User.php            # User model
├── database/
│   ├── migrations/             # Database migrations
│   ├── seeders/                # Database seeders
│   └── factories/              # Model factories
├── resources/
│   ├── views/                  # Blade templates
│   │   ├── components/         # Reusable components
│   │   ├── livewire/           # Livewire views
│   │   └── welcome.blade.php   # Landing page
│   ├── css/                    # Stylesheets
│   └── js/                     # JavaScript files
├── routes/
│   ├── web.php                 # Web routes
│   └── auth.php                # Authentication routes
├── tests/                      # Test files
│   ├── Feature/                # Feature tests
│   └── Unit/                   # Unit tests
└── public/                     # Public assets
```

## 🧪 Testing

This project uses **Pest** for testing. Run tests with:

```bash
php artisan test
```

Or using Pest directly:

```bash
./vendor/bin/pest
```

Run specific test suites:

```bash
php artisan test --testsuite=Feature
php artisan test --testsuite=Unit
```

Run specific test file:

```bash
php artisan test tests/Feature/DashboardTest.php
```

## 🎨 Code Style

The project uses **Laravel Pint** for code style fixing:

```bash
./vendor/bin/pint
```

Or configure your IDE to run Pint on save.

## 📸 Screenshots

_Add screenshots of your application here_

- Dashboard view
- Product management interface
- Sales transaction interface
- Sales history report

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Coding Standards

- Follow PSR-12 coding standards
- Write tests for new features
- Update documentation as needed
- Ensure all tests pass before submitting PR

## 📄 License

This project is open-sourced software licensed under the [MIT license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## 👥 Authors

- **Your Name** - *Initial work*

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Laravel](https://laravel.com/) - The PHP Framework
- [Livewire](https://livewire.laravel.com/) - Full-stack framework
- [Livewire Flux](https://livewireui.com/) - UI component library
- [Spatie](https://spatie.be/) - Laravel Permission package
- [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) - CSS framework

## 📞 Support

For support, email support@toko-rizqi.com or open an issue in the repository.

---

**Made with ❤️ using Laravel & Livewire**

Commit message:

Update author name and support email in README

README.md, after:

# TOKO RIZQI - Point of Sale (POS) System

A modern, full-featured Point of Sale (POS) application built with Laravel 12 and Livewire. This system helps businesses manage products, sales transactions, and inventory with ease. Features a clean, responsive interface with role-based access control for administrators and employees.

![Laravel](https://img.shields.io/badge/Laravel-12.x-FF2D20?style=for-the-badge&logo=laravel&logoColor=white)
![Livewire](https://img.shields.io/badge/Livewire-3.x-4E56A6?style=for-the-badge&logo=livewire&logoColor=white)
![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHP-8.2+-777BB4?style=for-the-badge&logo=php&logoColor=white)
![Tailwind CSS](https://img.shields.io/badge/Tailwind_CSS-4.x-38B2AC?style=for-the-badge&logo=tailwind-css&logoColor=white)

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Features](#-features)
- [Technology Stack](#-technology-stack)
- [Requirements](#-requirements)
- [Installation](#-installation)
- [Configuration](#-configuration)
- [Usage](#-usage)
- [Project Structure](#-project-structure)
- [Testing](#-testing)
- [Screenshots](#-screenshots)
- [Contributing](#-contributing)
- [License](#-license)

## ✨ Features

### 🔐 Authentication & Authorization
- Secure user authentication system
- Role-based access control (RBAC) with Spatie Permissions
- Two user roles: **Admin** and **Karyawan** (Employee)
- User management for administrators

### 📦 Product Management
- Add, edit, and delete products
- Product categorization
- Price management
- Product inventory tracking

### 💰 Sales Management
- Point of Sale (POS) interface for employees
- Sales transaction recording
- Automatic total calculation
- Sales history and reporting for administrators
- Detailed sales reports with product breakdown

### 📊 Dashboard & Analytics
- Separate dashboards for Admin and Employees
- Sales overview and statistics
- Recent transactions display
- Visual data representation

### ⚙️ Settings & Profile
- User profile management
- Password change functionality
- Appearance settings (theme customization)

### 🎨 Modern UI/UX
- Built with Livewire Flux components
- Responsive design (mobile-friendly)
- Dark mode support
- Modern, intuitive interface

## 🛠 Technology Stack

### Backend
- **PHP 8.2+** - Programming language
- **Laravel 12.x** - PHP framework
- **Livewire 3.x** - Full-stack framework for Laravel
- **Livewire Flux** - UI component library
- **Livewire Volt** - Single-file components
- **Spatie Laravel Permission** - Role and permission management

### Frontend
- **Tailwind CSS 4.x** - Utility-first CSS framework
- **Vite** - Next-generation frontend tooling
- **JavaScript (ES6+)** - Modern JavaScript

### Database
- **SQLite** - Lightweight database (default, easily configurable for MySQL/PostgreSQL)

### Development Tools
- **Pest** - Testing framework
- **Laravel Pint** - Code style fixer
- **Laravel Sail** - Docker development environment

## 📦 Requirements

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **PHP** >= 8.2
- **Composer** >= 2.0
- **Node.js** >= 18.x and **NPM**
- **SQLite** (or MySQL/PostgreSQL if preferred)
- **Web Server** (Apache/Nginx) or use `php artisan serve`

## 🚀 Installation

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd bljr
```

### Step 2: Install PHP Dependencies

```bash
composer install
```

### Step 3: Install Node Dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### Step 4: Environment Configuration

Copy the environment file and generate application key:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
php artisan key:generate
```

### Step 5: Database Setup

If using SQLite (default), create the database file:

```bash
touch database/database.sqlite
```

Or configure your preferred database in `.env`:

```env
DB_CONNECTION=mysql
DB_HOST=127.0.0.1
DB_PORT=3306
DB_DATABASE=your_database_name
DB_USERNAME=your_username
DB_PASSWORD=your_password
```

### Step 6: Run Migrations

```bash
php artisan migrate
```

### Step 7: Seed Permissions (for RBAC)

```bash
php artisan db:seed --class=PermissionSeeder
```

Or if you have a custom seeder:

```bash
php artisan db:seed
```

### Step 8: Build Assets

For development:

```bash
npm run dev
```

For production:

```bash
npm run build
```

### Step 9: Start the Development Server

```bash
php artisan serve
```

Or use the convenient dev script (runs server, queue, and vite concurrently):

```bash
composer dev
```

Visit `http://localhost:8000` in your browser.

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Environment Variables

Key environment variables to configure in `.env`:

```env
APP_NAME="TOKO RIZQI"
APP_ENV=local
APP_KEY=base64:... # Generated by key:generate
APP_DEBUG=true
APP_URL=http://localhost

DB_CONNECTION=sqlite
DB_DATABASE=/absolute/path/to/database/database.sqlite

# Or for MySQL
# DB_CONNECTION=mysql
# DB_HOST=127.0.0.1
# DB_PORT=3306
# DB_DATABASE=toko_rizqi
# DB_USERNAME=root
# DB_PASSWORD=

MAIL_MAILER=smtp
MAIL_HOST=mailpit
MAIL_PORT=1025
MAIL_USERNAME=null
MAIL_PASSWORD=null
MAIL_ENCRYPTION=null
MAIL_FROM_ADDRESS="hello@example.com"
MAIL_FROM_NAME="${APP_NAME}"
```

### Creating Roles and Users

After running migrations, create an admin user:

```bash
php artisan tinker
```

```php
$admin = \App\Models\User::create([
    'name' => 'Admin',
    'email' => 'admin@toko.com',
    'password' => bcrypt('password'),
    'email_verified_at' => now(),
]);

$admin->assignRole('admin');
```

Create an employee user:

```php
$karyawan = \App\Models\User::create([
    'name' => 'Karyawan',
    'email' => 'karyawan@toko.com',
    'password' => bcrypt('password'),
    'email_verified_at' => now(),
]);

$karyawan->assignRole('karyawan');
```

## 📖 Usage

### Admin Dashboard

Access the admin dashboard at `/admin/dashboard` (requires admin role):

- **Product Management** (`/admin/manajemenbarang`) - Manage products, categories, and prices
- **Sales History** (`/admin/riwayatpenjualan`) - View all sales transactions and reports
- **User Management** (`/admin/usermanagement`) - Manage users and assign roles

### Employee (Karyawan) Dashboard

Access the employee interface at `/karyawan/penjualan` (requires karyawan role):

- Input sales transactions
- Select products and quantities
- Complete sales with automatic total calculation

### User Settings

All authenticated users can access:

- **Profile Settings** (`/settings/profile`) - Update personal information
- **Password Settings** (`/settings/password`) - Change password
- **Appearance Settings** (`/settings/appearance`) - Customize theme preferences

## 📁 Project Structure

```
bljr/
├── app/
│   ├── Http/
│   │   └── Controllers/        # HTTP Controllers
│   ├── Livewire/               # Livewire Components
│   │   ├── Admin/              # Admin-specific components
│   │   ├── Auth/               # Authentication components
│   │   ├── Karyawan/           # Employee-specific components
│   │   └── Settings/           # Settings components
│   └── Models/                 # Eloquent Models
│       ├── ManjemenBarang.php  # Product model
│       ├── Penjualan.php       # Sales model
│       ├── PenjualanProduk.php # Sales product pivot model
│       └── User.php            # User model
├── database/
│   ├── migrations/             # Database migrations
│   ├── seeders/                # Database seeders
│   └── factories/              # Model factories
├── resources/
│   ├── views/                  # Blade templates
│   │   ├── components/         # Reusable components
│   │   ├── livewire/           # Livewire views
│   │   └── welcome.blade.php   # Landing page
│   ├── css/                    # Stylesheets
│   └── js/                     # JavaScript files
├── routes/
│   ├── web.php                 # Web routes
│   └── auth.php                # Authentication routes
├── tests/                      # Test files
│   ├── Feature/                # Feature tests
│   └── Unit/                   # Unit tests
└── public/                     # Public assets
```

## 🧪 Testing

This project uses **Pest** for testing. Run tests with:

```bash
php artisan test
```

Or using Pest directly:

```bash
./vendor/bin/pest
```

Run specific test suites:

```bash
php artisan test --testsuite=Feature
php artisan test --testsuite=Unit
```

Run specific test file:

```bash
php artisan test tests/Feature/DashboardTest.php
```

## 🎨 Code Style

The project uses **Laravel Pint** for code style fixing:

```bash
./vendor/bin/pint
```

Or configure your IDE to run Pint on save.

## 📸 Screenshots

_Add screenshots of your application here_

- Dashboard view
- Product management interface
- Sales transaction interface
- Sales history report

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Coding Standards

- Follow PSR-12 coding standards
- Write tests for new features
- Update documentation as needed
- Ensure all tests pass before submitting PR

## 📄 License

This project is open-sourced software licensed under the [MIT license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## 👥 Authors

- **Satria Fadhil Muhammad** - *Initial work*

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Laravel](https://laravel.com/) - The PHP Framework
- [Livewire](https://livewire.laravel.com/) - Full-stack framework
- [Livewire Flux](https://livewireui.com/) - UI component library
- [Spatie](https://spatie.be/) - Laravel Permission package
- [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) - CSS framework

## 📞 Support

For support, email college.satriafm@gmail.com or open an issue in the repository.

---

**Made with ❤️ using Laravel & Livewire**
